  With the development of Chinese economy, the world is seeking business cooperation with China, so as to win the booming market. Learning the local language helps them to win more Chinese customers, so more and more foreigners start to learn mandarin, but they find it is the most difficult language to master.
  Firstly, there are four tones in Chinese language, which is hard to pronounce for them. As different tones has the different meanings, foreign people feel confused when they hear different tones, they can figure out the meanings, because the words sound almost the same. So most of them speaking Chinese just ignore the tones, which makes them have special accent.
  Secondly, Chinese language is profound, especially the old poems. The history of more than five thousand years makes this big country full of charm. At the same time, the old poem is also difficulty for the local people, let alone to the foreigners. We can keep trace of the history by studying the poems. So it is the necessary part learning mandarin.
  As the saying that there is a will, there is a way. Some foreigners still can learn Chinese well.
  I have a good friend. Her name is Li Hua. We know each other when we were five years old, because we have so many things in common. We become partners soon. I like to go out for fun with her. She always knows my idea and we can enjoy our time. I cherish our friendship so much. I hope we can be best friends forever.
  The day I go to school, I remember that I feel so scared because it is the first time for me to leave my parents. Then my teacher comes to me and smiles at me. I feel so comfortable. She introduces many classmates to me. Then we play many funny games. I become happy soon and feel my teacher's caring and love.
  First of all, confidence makes us happier in our life. Life is like a wonderful song, a bright and colorful painting. If confidence is with us in our life, we will find that life really becomes richer and more interesting.
  Then, confidence makes us brave and courageous. If we lack confidence in ourselves, how can we overcome difficulties we meet with? If we have no confideuce in ourselves, how can we succeed in developing ourselves in the futureWithout confidence, nothing can be accomplished. That is to say, if you want to win, you have to believe in yourself.
  Finally, I would like to use the following words as our mutual encouragement, If you think you can, you can.
  Youth comes only once in a lifetime, therefore, it is important that we should not waste those years in idleness and bad living.
  This is also the time when our memories are best. We are able to learn more during this time than when we become older. During our younger years, we have the enthusiasm to set high goals for ourselves. We also try to overcome obstacles which are placed in our way.
  If we realize how precious youth is, we will be fulfilled when we are young as well as when we are older. If we waste our youth, we will spend the rest of our lives wishing we could be young again.
  Christmas is the most important festival in the western world. It falls on December 25th. When my mother and I stayed in America, we were invited by one of my mother's friends to have Christmas with an American family. We bought some presents for our American friends on our way to their house.
  They had prepared different kinds of gifts for their family and guests when we got to their house, such as Christmas candles, cakes, cards, little toys, biscuits and so on. A Christmas tree was placed in the comer of the brilliant hall.
  How beautiful it was! We were impressed by these. We had a big meal. After dinner, they told us some interesting stories about Christmas. We learned that Christmas had something to do with God. We went to bed at midnight. Though we knew the Santa Claus was not true, we were still waiting for the Santa Claus with white beard to bring us presents.And we received many beautiful presents the next morning.
  This Christmas was really unforgettable. Not only did I have a good time, but also I knew something about foreign culture.
  Everyone has his dreams, but not all these dreams can come true. People give up their dreams for this or that reason. Those whose dreams become true have at least one thing in common, that is, they always hold fast to their dreams.
  Marie Curie, a famous scientist, has set a good example. In 1898, Marie found a new element in the pitchblende. In order to prove her discovery, she must get it and show it to the world.
  Then to get the new element became her dream and goal of her life. After four years hard work and refinement of tons of pitchblende, Marie and her husband at last saw the dim blue light of the new element radium.
  Her dream had come true. There are many other examples. Just around us, for instance, the athletes who gain the gold medals, the artists who are popular with the public, and even the students who enter tile university after years of hard study and preparation, are all dream-holders.
